

1
Abdomen—General
Michael D. Sgroi, Areg Grigorian, and Christian de Virgilio
Questions
1. A 74-year-old male presents to your clinic hoping to have his reducible umbilical hernia repaired
secondary to increasing but intermittent pain and discomfort. Two days before his clinic visit, he had
been discharged from the hospital for unstable angina for which he underwent balloon angioplasty
with placement of a bare metal coronary artery stent (BMS). When should his surgery be scheduled?
A. 2 weeks
B. 1 month
C. 2 months
D. 6 months
E. 1 year
2. Which of the following is true regarding abdominal incisions and the prevention of incisional
hernias?
A. A 3:1 suture:wound length is the current recommended closure length.
B. There is no difference in hernia occurrence between a running closure and an interrupted closure.
C. A slowly absorbable monofilament suture is preferred in the closure of the fascia in a running
fashion.
D. Prophylactic use of mesh after open aortic aneurysm surgery is not efficacious.
E. A 1-cm bite between each stitch is the recommended distance during abdominal closure.
3. A 55-year-old obese male presents to the hospital for his bariatric sleeve gastrectomy procedure. His
comorbidities include diabetes and hypertension, and he states he was diagnosed with “walking
pneumonia” 2 weeks ago and placed on antibiotics, which he has finished. Which of the following
would not be of benefit if the SCIP measures for preoperative and postoperative care are followed?
A. Placing the patient on an insulin sliding scale in an effort to keep glucose levels between 80 to 120
mg/dL
B. Clipping the patient’s abdominal hair with an electric shaver before operating
C. Administering anticoagulation on postoperative day 1
D. Administering antibiotics within 1 hour of surgery
E. Discontinuing antibiotics by postoperative day 1
4. A 32-year-old female who is 24 weeks pregnant presents to the emergency department with an acute
onset of abdominal pain, fever, and vomiting. She states the pain woke her up in the middle of the
night with sudden onset of epigastric pain that is now diffuse. She has no vaginal bleeding and fetal
monitoring demonstrates normal vitals for the fetus. Upon physical exam, the patient has diffuse
tenderness with guarding throughout the abdomen, worse in the epigastric region. Pelvic
examination is normal. She has a leukocytosis of 15,000 cells/L. Abdominal x-ray series shows some
dilated bowel loops but no other findings. What is your next step in management of this patient?
A. Abdominal ultrasound
B. CT scan of the abdomen/pelvis with contrast
C. Admit and observe with serial abdominal exams
14

D. Exploratory laparotomy
E. Diagnostic laparoscopy
5. Which of the following is true regarding omental torsion?
A. Secondary torsion is more common than primary.
B. Treatment is usually observation and pain control.
C. If surgery is necessary, management consists of detorsion and omentopexy.
D. The pain is usually in the left lower quadrant of the abdomen.
E. It typically produces purulent-appearing peritoneal fluid.
6. The intrinsic hemostatic characteristics of the omentum are due to its:
A. Ability to recruit platelets
B. Greater concentration of von Willebrand factor
C. Greater concentration of tissue factor
D. Ability to induce local vasoconstriction
E. Ability to activate the intrinsic coagulation pathway
7. The most common organism isolated from the infected peritoneal fluid of a patient with a peritoneal
dialysis catheter is:
A. Beta-hemolytic streptococcus
B. Enterococcus
C. Escherichia coli
D. Coagulase-negative staphylococcus
E. Coagulase-positive staphylococcus
8. A 70-year-old woman presents with progressive abdominal pain and abdominal distention with
nonshifting dullness. A CT scan demonstrates loculated collections of fluid and scalloping of the
intra-abdominal organs. At surgery, several liters of yellowish gray mucoid material are present on
the omentum and peritoneal surfaces. Which of the following is true about this condition?
A. There is no role for surgical resection.
B. It is unlikely to involve the appendix.
C. This most likely represents a primary peritoneal malignancy.
D. It is more common in males.
E. Cytoreductive surgery is indicated.
9. The most common cause of a retroperitoneal abscess is:
A. Diverticulitis
B. Appendicitis
C. Renal disease
D. Tuberculosis of the spine
E. Hematogenous spread from a remote location
10. A 50-year-old male with cirrhotic ascites secondary to hepatitis C presents with fever, elevated white
blood cell count, and abdominal pain. He has a history of esophageal varices. He has been on the
liver transplant list for 6 months. Paracentesis was performed and cultures were sent. A single
organism grows from the culture. Which of the following is true regarding this condition?
A. He is currently eligible for a liver transplant.
B. Prophylactic use of fluoroquinolone can be used to prevent this condition.
C. In adults, nephrotic syndrome is the most common risk factor.
D. In children, E. coli is the most common isolate.
E. He will likely need an exploratory laparotomy.
11. Which of the following is true regarding a rectus sheath hematoma?
A. If located above the umbilicus, it is more likely to resemble an acute intra-abdominal process.
B. If located below the umbilicus, it is more likely to cause severe bleeding.
15

C. The majority are associated with a history of trauma.
D. Operative drainage is the treatment of choice in most cases.
E. Angiographic embolization is not useful.
12. A 35-year-old female presents with an enlarging mass in her right arm. After appropriate workup,
she is diagnosed with a desmoid tumor. Which of the following is true about this condition?
A. They have a high rate of metastasis without proper treatment.
B. The chance of local recurrence is low after appropriate intervention.
C. Oral contraceptive pills (OCP) have been shown to reduce their size and make them more
resectable.
D. Colonoscopy is indicated.
E. These tumors arise from proliferative chondroblastic cells.
13. Which of the following is true regarding retroperitoneal fibrosis?
A. The mainstay of treatment involves radiation therapy.
B. It occurs more commonly in women.
C. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is typically normal.
D. Intravenous pyelography (IVP) is the diagnostic study of choice.
E. Medial deviation of the ureters is characteristic.
14. Which of the following is true regarding retroperitoneal sarcomas?
A. They are best managed by enucleation.
B. Prognosis is best determined by histologic grade.
C. Lymph node metastasis is common.
D. Fibrosarcomas are the most common type.
E. Radiation therapy is often curative for small sarcomas.
15. A 75-year-old female with recently diagnosed atrial fibrillation, for which she was given an
anticoagulant, presents with sudden onset abdominal pain. It is not related to oral intake. Surgical
history is remarkable for a total hip arthroplasty 3 years ago. Her physical exam is significant for a
tender, palpable abdominal wall mass above the umbilicus that persists during flexion of abdominal
wall muscles. The mass is most likely related to which of the following?
A. Thrombocytopenia
B. Bleeding from the superior epigastric artery
C. Occult trauma
D. An intra-abdominal abscess
E. Bleeding from the inferior epigastric artery
Answers
1. B. Good communication between the cardiologist and surgeon is essential before performing
coronary interventions in a patient who requires surgery. Coronary revascularization before elective
surgery is not recommended if the patient has asymptomatic coronary artery disease (CAD).
However, in the setting of an acute coronary syndrome (acute myocardial infarction [MI], unstable
angina), a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is recommended before surgery. The options
are to perform balloon angioplasty alone or add a bare metal stent (BMS) or a drug-eluting stent
(DES). The DES is the best long-term option, but it requires a longer delay to surgery. Thus the
decision of which to use depends on the urgency of the subsequent operation (urgent, time
sensitive, or elective) and the feasibility of operating with antiplatelet agents on board. If the
operation is urgent (within 2 weeks), a PCI with balloon angioplasty may be best because the
waiting period for surgery is 2 weeks (A). If the operation is time sensitive (2–6 weeks), a BMS is a
better option because it is less likely to suddenly occlude as compared with angioplasty alone.
However, one should wait 1 month before performing surgery (C). Because this patient has a
relatively symptomatic hernia, the operation is time sensitive. Finally, if a DES is placed, the
recommendation is to wait 6 months before performing surgery (D, E).
16

    References: Fleisher, L. A., Fleischmann, K. E., Auerbach, A. D., et al. (2014). 2014 ACC/AHA
guideline on perioperative cardiovascular evaluation and management of patients undergoing
noncardiac surgery: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Task Force on practice guidelines. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 64(22), e77–e137.
    Guyatt, G. H., Akl, E. A., Crowther, M., et al. (2012). Executive summary: antithrombotic therapy
and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based
Clinical Practice Guidelines [published corrections appear in Chest. 141(4), 1129. Dosage error in
article text. Chest, 2012;142(6):1698. Dosage error in article text]. Chest, 2012;141(2 suppl):7S–47S.
    Livhits, M., de Virgilio, C., et al. (2011). Risk of surgery following recent myocardial infarction.
Annals of Surgery, 253(5), 857–864.
2. C. The material and the surgical technique used to close an open abdomen are important
determinants of the risk of developing an incisional hernia. The European Hernia Society has
recently come out with guidelines recommending that small bite closure be performed using at
least a 4:1 suture:wound length during closure (A). It has also been shown that running closure is
superior to an interrupted closure (B). Prophylactic use of mesh during closure has been shown to
be efficacious after open aortic aneurysm surgery because of the high rate of incisional hernia (D).
A randomized control trial looking at small bites compared to large bites has recently been
performed looking at 560 patients who received either small, 5-mm bites 5 mm apart or large, 1-cm
bites 1 cm apart. They found a statistically significant reduced rate of hernia occurrence in the
small bite group, which is now the recommended bite size and length (E). A slowly absorbable
monofilament suture (polydioxanone suture [PDS]) has been shown to also be the recommended
suture in abdominal closure.
    References: Deerenberg, E. B., Harlaar, J. J., Steyerberg, E. W., et al. (2015). Small bites versus large
bites for closure of abdominal midline incisions (STITCH): a double-blind, multicentre,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet, 386(10000), 1254–1260.
    Muysoms, F. E., Antoniou, S. A., Bury, K., et al. (2015). European Hernia Society guidelines on the
closure of abdominal wall incisions. Hernia, 19(1), 1–24.
3. A. The Surgical Care Improvement Project (SCIP) is a national quality partnership of organizations
interested in improving surgical outcomes that began in 2006. Care is taken by all institutions to
follow the recommendations by the Joint Commission because all these outcomes are documented
and measured quarterly. The core measures include giving antibiotics within 1 hour of surgery (D)
and discontinuing within 24 hours (E), Foley catheter removal by postoperative day 2, and hair
removal by clipping on the day of surgery. Shaving the hair off has been shown to increase the risk
of infection (B). Other beneficial measures include being on appropriate venous thromboembolism
(VTE) prophylaxis within 24 hours after surgery and glucose control. The importance of glucose
control and surgical outcomes has been well established; however, in 2009 the NICE-SUGAR trial
demonstrated that strict glucose control was actually associated with worse outcomes. It is now
widely accepted that the goal should be to keep glucose levels below 180 mg/dL (C).
    Reference: NICE-SUGAR Study Investigators, Finfer, S., Chittock, D. R., et al. (2009). Intensive
versus conventional glucose control in critically ill patients. The New England Journal of Medicine,
360(13), 1283–1297.
4. B. Fear of radiation exposure during pregnancy should not take precedence over quickly
establishing the correct diagnosis and initiating treatment. Based on the patient’s acute onset of
symptoms and location, the presentation is concerning for peritonitis, potentially due to a
perforated viscus, such as a peptic ulcer, or a closed loop bowel obstruction. In this situation, the
best next step would be to perform a computed tomography (CT) can of the abdomen (A, C–E). As
a general rule, the care of the patient, not the fetus, should take first priority. Based on the National
Guideline Clearinghouse, expeditious and accurate diagnosing should take precedent over risk of
ionizing radiation. The effects of radiation exposure on the fetus depend on the gestational age and
the amount of radiation. In general, the earlier the gestational age, the greater the risk is. High
dose (>10 rads) exposure early in pregnancy (within the first 4 weeks) can lead to fetal demise.
However, such a high exposure exceeds the dose of typical imaging (abdominal x-ray is 200 mrad
while abdominal and pelvic CT is about 3–4 rads). Between 8 to 15 weeks’ gestation, high-dose (>10
rads) radiation can lead to intrauterine growth retardation and central nervous defects. Beyond 15
weeks (as in the present case), there do not appear to be any deterministic effects (dose-dependent
events such as fetal loss, congenital defects) on the fetus. Stochastic effects (those that are not dose
17

dependent), such as the subsequent risk of cancer or leukemia, are increased with exposure of 1
rad or more. The risk is about 1 cancer for every 500 exposures. Conversely, if the pregnant patient
with an acute abdomen progresses to peritonitis and bowel perforation, the risk of fetal demise is
very high. Thus the risk of fetal miscarriage is higher with visceral perforation than with radiation
exposure, and therefore all measures should be taken for an accurate diagnosis. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is considered a good imaging option in pregnancy; however, its use in
the emergent setting may be limited by its availability. Ultrasound is also useful, but would be
more useful if the patient presented with right upper quadrant pain (suspected biliary disease) or
right lower quadrant pain (suspected appendicitis).
    References: Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, and use of laparoscopy for surgical problems
during pregnancy. 1996 Feb (revised 2011). NGC:008496. Society of American Gastrointestinal and
Endoscopic Surgeons—Medical Specialty Society. Retrieved from the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services website: https://www.guideline.gov/summaries/summary/32671/guidelines-
for-diagnosis-treatment-and-use-of-laparoscopy-for-surgical-problems-during-pregnancy.
    Khandelwal, A., Fasih, N., Kielar, A., et al. (2013). Imaging of acute abdomen in pregnancy.
Radiologic Clinics of North America, 51(6), 1005–1022.
5. A. It is important to be aware of omental torsion because it readily mimics an intra-abdominal
perforation. Because it is typically very difficult to diagnose preoperatively, the diagnosis is most
often made at surgery. Torsion of the omentum describes a twisting of the omentum around its
vascular pedicle along the long axis. Primary torsion, in which case there is no underlying
pathology, is extremely rare. Secondary torsion is much more common, and the torsion is usually
precipitated by a fixed point such as a tumor, an adhesion, a hernia sac, or an area of intra-
abdominal inflammation. Omental torsion is much more common in adults in their fourth or fifth
decade of life. Children with torsion are typically obese, likely contributing to a fatty omentum that
predisposes to twisting. Other factors that predispose a patient to torsion include a bifid omentum
and a narrowed omental pedicle. In primary omental torsion, the twisted omentum tends to be
localized to the right side; thus it is most commonly confused with acute appendicitis, acute
cholecystitis, and pelvic inflammatory disease (D). Complicating the diagnosis is the fact that the
omentum itself tends to migrate and envelop areas of inflammation. Laparoscopy is ideal for
establishing the diagnosis and to exclude other etiologies. Treatment is to resect the twisted
omentum, which can often be infarcted at the time of surgery, and to correct any other related
condition that may be identified (B, C). The finding of purulent fluid would suggest another
diagnosis because it is not consistent with omental torsion. The fluid usually seen is
serosanguinous (E).
    References: Chew, D., Holgersen, L., & Friedman, D. (1995). Primary omental torsion in children.
Journal of Pediatric Surgery, 30(6), 816–817.
    Saber, A., & LaRaja, R. (2007). Omental torsion. Retrieved from the Medscape website:
http://emedicine.medscape.com.
    Sánchez, J., Rosado, R., Ramírez, D., et al. (2002). Torsion of the greater omentum: treatment by
laparoscopy. Surgical Laparoscopy, Endoscopy & Percutaneous Techniques, 12(6), 443–445.
    Young, T., Lee, H., & Tang, H. (2004). Primary torsion of the greater omentum. International Surgery,
89(2), 72–75.
6. C. Rutherford Morison originally described the omentum as the abdominal “policeman” as it walls
off infections and prevents further peritoneal contamination. In fact, omental wrapping is still
used by trauma surgeons to control bleeding around the liver and spleen. In an attempt to explain
the omentum’s hemostatic properties, a 1996 study demonstrated that the concentration of tissue
factor in omentum is more than twice the amount per gram of that found in muscle. This property
facilitates the activation of the extrinsic pathway of coagulation in the settings of trauma, infection,
or ischemia. This leads to the production of fibrin, which facilitates the adherence of the omentum
to these areas. The remaining choices do not contribute to the omentum’s intrinsic hemostatic
capability (A, B, D, E).
    References: Logmans, A., Schoenmakers, C., Haensel, S., et al. (1996). High tissue factor
concentration in the omentum, a possible cause of its hemostatic properties. European Journal of
Clinical Investigation, 26(1):82–83.
    Seymour, N. E., & Bell, R. L. (2014). Abdominal wall, omentum, mesentery, and retroperitoneum. In
F. Brunicardi, D. K. Andersen, T. R. Billiar, et al. (Eds.), Schwartz’s principles of surgery (10th ed.).
18

New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
7. D. Coagulase-negative staphylococci (Staphylococcus epidermidis) is by far the most common cause
of peritoneal catheter–related infections (A–C). Staphylococcus aureus is coagulase positive (E).
Another defining feature of S. aureus is that it is catalase positive. The diagnosis is made by a
combination of abdominal pain, development of cloudy peritoneal fluid, and an elevated
peritoneal fluid white blood cell count greater than 100/mm
3
. Initial treatment consists of
intraperitoneal antibiotics, which seem to be more effective than intravenous (IV) antibiotics for a
total of 2 weeks. If the infection fails to clear, based on abdominal examination, clinical picture, or
persistent peritoneal fluid leukocytosis, then the catheter needs to be removed and a temporary
hemodialysis catheter will need to be inserted. S. aureus and gram-negative organism infections are
less likely to respond to antibiotic management alone.
8. E. Pseudomyxoma peritonei is a rare process in which the peritoneum becomes covered with
semisolid mucus and large loculated cystic masses. It is unclear whether it represents a true
malignant process (C). A useful classification derived from a large series uses two categories:
disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis (DPAM) and peritoneal mucinous carcinomatosis
(PMCA). DPAM is histologically a benign process and most often due to a ruptured appendix. In
one large series, appendiceal mucinous adenoma was associated with approximately 60% of
patients with DPAM.In patients classified as PMCA, the origin was either a well-differentiated
appendiceal or intestinal mucinous adenocarcinoma (B). Pseudomyxoma peritonei is most
common in women aged 50 to 70 years (D). It is often asymptomatic until late in its course.
Symptoms are often nonspecific, but the most common symptom is increased abdominal girth.
Physical examination may demonstrate a distended abdomen with nonshifting dullness.
Management is surgical, with cytoreduction of the primary and secondary implants, including
peritonectomy and omentectomy (A). If there is a clear origin at the appendix, a right colectomy
should also be performed. If the origin appears to be the ovary, total abdominal hysterectomy with
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy is recommended. The recurrence rate is very high (76% in one
series).
    References: Gough, D., Donohue, J., Schutt, A. J., et al. (1994). Pseudomyxoma peritonei: long-term
patient survival with an aggressive regional approach. Annals of Surgery, 219(2), 112–119.
    Hinson, F., & Ambrose, N. (1998). Pseudomyxoma peritonei. The British Journal of Surgery,
85(10),1332–1339.
    Ronnett B., Zahn, C., Kurman, R., et al. (1995). Disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis and
peritoneal mucinous carcinomatosis: a clinicopathologic analysis of 109 cases with emphasis on
distinguishing pathologic features, site of origin, prognosis, and relationship to “pseudomyxoma
peritonei.” The American Journal of Surgical Pathology, 19(12), 1390–1408.
9. C. Primary retroperitoneal abscesses are secondary to hematogenous spread while secondary
retroperitoneal abscesses are related to an infection in an adjacent organ. The most common
source of retroperitoneal abscesses are secondary with renal infections accounting for nearly 50%
of all cases. Hematogenous spread is not a significant contributing factor for secondary
retroperitoneal abscesses (E). Other common causes include retrocecal appendicitis (B), perforated
duodenal ulcers, pancreatitis, and diverticulitis (A). In rare cases, patients may have Pott’s disease,
which is a disseminated form related to tuberculosis (D). Patients typically present with back,
pelvic, flank, or thigh pain with associated fever and leukocytosis. Flank erythema may be present.
Kidney infections often have gram-negative rods such as Proteus and E. coli. Treatment consists of
broad-spectrum antibiotics and drainage, as well as identification of the source. If the abscess is
simple and unilocular then CT-guided drainage is the treatment of choice. Operative drainage may
be required for complex abscesses.
10. B. Spontaneous (primary) bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is defined as bacterial infection of ascitic
fluid in the absence of any surgically treatable intra-abdominal infection. Patients usually present
with fever, diarrhea, and abdominal pain but if severe enough, will also have altered mental status,
hypotension, hypothermia, and a paralytic ileus. However, 13% of patients will be completely
asymptomatic. Treatment is with antibiotics alone. Prophylactic antibiotics (with fluoroquinolones)
to prevent SBP should be considered in high-risk patients with cirrhosis, ascites, and history of
gastrointestinal bleeding (as in the present case). Patients with cirrhosis who have low ascitic fluid
protein (<1.0 g/dL) and those with a serum bilirubin greater than 2.5 mg/dL should also be started
on prophylactic antibiotics. Opsonic or bactericidal activity of ascitic fluid is related to protein
19

concentration. One of the key features of primary peritonitis is that the isolate is usually a single
organism and that organism usually is not an anaerobe. Secondary peritonitis refers to peritonitis
in the setting of a bowel perforation. Thus, polymicrobial or anaerobic cultures should raise
suspicion for bowel perforation and secondary peritonitis (E). In adults, the most common
pathogens in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis are the aerobic enteric flora E. coli and Klebsiella
(C). In children with nephrogenic or hepatogenic ascites, group A Streptococcus, S. aureus, and
Streptococcus pneumoniae are common isolates (D). The diagnosis is made by paracentesis
demonstrating more than 250 neutrophils/mm
3
 of ascitic fluid in the presence of a correlating
clinical presentation. This should be evaluated before initiating antibiotics because cultures will
return falsely negative. An active infection is considered a contraindication for liver
transplantation (A).
    References: Bell, R. B., & Seymour, N. E. (2005). Abdominal wall, omentum, mesentery, and
retroperitoneum. In F. C. Brunicardi, D. K. Andersen, T. Billiar, et al. (Eds.), Schwartz’s principles of
surgery (pp. 1317–1328) (8th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
    Runyon, B. A. (1990). Monomicrobial nonneutrocytic bacterascites: a variant of spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis. Hepatology, 12(4 Pt 1), 710.
    Turnage, R. H., Li, B., & McDonald, J. C. (2004). Abdominal wall, umbilicus, peritoneum,
mesenteries, omentum and retroperitoneum. In C. M. Townsend Jr, R. D. Beauchamp, B. M. Evers,
& K. L. Mattox (Eds.), Sabiston textbook of surgery: The biological basis of modern surgical practice (pp.
1171–1198) (17th ed.). Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders.
11. B. Rectus sheath hematomas are clinically significant because of the fact that they can easily be
mistaken for an intra-abdominal inflammatory process. The etiology is an injury to an epigastric
artery within the rectus sheath. In most cases, there is no clear history of trauma (C). Particularly in
the elderly who are taking oral anticoagulants, they typically occur spontaneously. Patients
frequently describe a sudden onset of unilateral abdominal pain, sometimes preceded by a
coughing fit. In one series, 11 of 12 patients were women, and in another series, all 8 were women,
with an average age in the sixth decade. Below the arcuate line, there is no aponeurotic posterior
covering to the rectus muscle. Therefore, hematomas below this line can cross the midline, causing
a larger hematoma to form, and cause bilateral lower quadrant pain resembling a perforated
viscus. On physical examination, a mass is often palpable. The Fothergill sign is the finding of a
palpable abdominal mass that remains unchanged with contraction of the rectus muscles. This
helps distinguish it from an intra-abdominal abscess, which would not be palpable with rectus
contraction. The diagnosis is best established with a CT scan, which will demonstrate a fluid
collection in the rectus muscle. The hematocrit should be closely monitored. Once the diagnosis is
established, management is primarily nonoperative and consists of resuscitation, monitoring of
serial hemoglobin/hematocrit levels, and reversal of anticoagulation (D). However, one should be
cautious with reversal of anticoagulation, as stable patients may benefit from continued
anticoagulation (e.g., recent mechanical valve). On rare occasions, angiographic embolization may
be necessary (E). Surgical management, while rarely necessary, would involve ligation of the
bleeding vessel and evacuation of the hematoma.
    References: Berná, J., Zuazu, I., Madrigal, M., et al. (2000). Conservative treatment of large rectus
sheath hematoma in patients undergoing anticoagulant therapy. Abdominal Imaging, 25(3), 230–234.
    Zainea, G., & Jordan, F. (1988). Rectus sheath hematomas: their pathogenesis, diagnosis, and
management. The American Surgeon, 54(10), 630–633.
12. D. Desmoid tumors are unusual soft-tissue neoplasms that arise from fascial or fibro-aponeurotic
tissue. They are proliferations of benign-appearing fibroblastic cells with abundant collagen and
few mitoses (E). Desmoid tumors do not metastasize (A); however, they are locally aggressive and
have a very high local recurrence rate reaching almost 50% (B). They have been associated with
Gardner syndrome (intestinal polyposis, osteomas, fibromas, and epidermal or sebaceous cysts)
and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), which is why patients should be scheduled for a
colonoscopy soon after diagnosis. In sporadic cases, surgical trauma appears to be an important
cause. Desmoid tumors may develop within or adjacent to surgical scars. Patients with FAP have a
1000-fold increased risk of the development of desmoid tumors. Desmoids are more common in
women of childbearing age and may be linked to estrogen. OCPs have also been found to be
associated with the occurrence of these tumors (C). Patients are typically in their third or fourth
decade of life and present with pain, a mass, or both. They are classified as either extra-abdominal
20

(extremities, shoulder), abdominal wall, or intra-abdominal (mesenteric and pelvic). There are no
typical radiographic findings, but MRI may delineate muscle or soft-tissue infiltration and is
required in larger tumors to delineate anatomic relations before surgical intervention. Core needle
biopsy often reveals collagen with diffuse spindle cells and abundant fibrous stroma, which may
suggest a low-grade fibrosarcoma; however, the cells lack mitotic activity. An open incisional
biopsy of lesions larger than 3 to 4 cm is often necessary. Wide local excision with negative margins
is indicated for symptomatic desmoid tumors. Nonresectable or incidentally found, asymptomatic,
intra-abdominal desmoid tumors (even if resectable) should be treated with nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory agents (e.g., sulindac) and antiestrogens, which have met with objective
response rates of 50%. In regards to adjuvant therapy, recent retrospective reviews have seen
significant reductions in recurrence with radiation combined with surgery and even with radiation
alone. More research is necessary for the use of chemotherapy agents, but it has been seen that
when cytotoxic chemotherapy agents are used in inoperable desmoid tumors, there is a 20% to 40%
positive response. The aggressive nature of these tumors and high rate of occurrence make
desmoid tumors the second most common cause of death in patients with FAP, after colorectal
carcinoma.
    References: Ballo, M., Zagars, G., Pollack, A., et al. (1999). Desmoid tumor: prognostic factors and
outcome after surgery, radiation therapy, or combined surgery and radiation therapy. Journal of
Clinical Oncology: Official Journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, 17(1), 158–167.
    Hansmann, A., Adolph, C., Vogel, T., et al. (2004). High dose tamoxifen and sulindac as first-line
treatment for desmoid tumors. Cancer, 100(3), 612–620.
    Janinis, J., Patriki, M., Vini, L., et al. (2003). The pharmacological treatment of aggressive
fibromatosis: a systematic review. Annals of oncology: Official Journal of the European Society for
Medical Oncology / ESMO, 14(2), 181–190.
    Nuyttens, J. J., Rust, P. F., Thomas, C. R., Jr., et al. (2000). Surgery versus radiation therapy for
patients with aggressive fibromatosis or desmoid tumors: a comparative review of 22 articles.
Cancer, 88(7), 1517–1523.
13. E. Retroperitoneal fibrosis is characterized by a periaortic and retroperitoneal proliferation of
fibrous tissue and chronic inflammation that extends laterally and often surrounds the ureters and
leads to ureteral obstruction, flank pain, and, in some cases, acute renal failure. The disorder is
idiopathic (also known as Ormond disease) in 70% of cases, with the other 30% being a secondary
reaction to an inciting inflammatory process, malignancy, or medication (e.g., methysergide use). It
occurs twice as often in men as women, with a mean age at presentation of 50 to 60 years (B). One
theory is that it is related to an autoimmune response, having a similar allele (HLA-DRB1∗03), to
type I diabetes, myasthenia gravis, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). There does not seem
to be any support for an infectious etiology. The fibrotic process can eventually encase the ureters,
inferior vena cava, aorta, mesenteric vessels, and/or sympathetic nerves. On physical examination,
patients are often hypertensive and an abdominal or flank mass may be palpated. Compression of
pelvic veins may lead to lower extremity edema and pelvic congestion. Laboratory evaluation often
demonstrates elevated blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels as the majority of these patients
will have azotemia. Additionally, an elevation in ESR is a common finding (C). Ultrasound is often
used as the initial study to evaluate extent of ureter involvement and hydronephrosis. IVP will also
show hydronephrosis, as well as the extrinsic compression of the ureters. A noncontrast CT scan,
though, is the most reliable study used for diagnosis, demonstrating a homogenous fibrous plaque
surrounding the lower aorta and iliac arteries (D). Medial deviation of the ureters is characteristic
for idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis but not pathognomonic. It tends to have a symmetric
distribution. Malignant tumors conversely tend to deviate the ureters laterally (E). It is important
to note that malignant tumors can induce retroperitoneal fibrosis. As such, CT-guided needle
biopsy is essential. The mainstay of treatment is use of corticosteroids. Immunosuppressants have
also been used in those refractory to steroid treatment.
    References: Cronin, C., Lohan, D., Blake, M., et al. (2008). Retroperitoneal fibrosis: a review of
clinical features and imaging findings. American Journal of Roentgenol, 191(2), 423–431.
    Gilkeson, G., & Allen, N. (1996). Retroperitoneal fibrosis: a true connective tissue disease.
Rheumatic Diseases Clinics of North America, 22(1), 23–38.
    Martorana, D., Vaglio, A., Greco, P., et al. (2006). Chronic periaortitis and HLA-DRB1∗03: another
clue to an autoimmune origin. Arthritis and Rheumatism, 55(1), 126–130.
21

14. B. Most retroperitoneal tumors are malignant and comprise approximately half of all soft-tissue
sarcomas. The most common sarcomas occurring in the retroperitoneum are liposarcomas,
malignant fibrous histiocytomas, and leiomyosarcomas (D). Approximately 50% of patients will
have a local recurrence and 20% to 30% will end up having distant metastases. Lymph node
metastases are rare (C). Retroperitoneal sarcomas present as large masses because they do not
typically produce symptoms until their mass effect creates compression or invasion of adjacent
structures. Symptoms may include gastrointestinal hemorrhage, early satiety, nausea, vomiting,
and lower extremity swelling. Retroperitoneal sarcomas have a worse prognosis than
nonretroperitoneal sarcomas. The best chance for long-term survival is achieved with an en bloc,
margin-negative resection. Tumor stage at presentation, high histologic grade, unresectability, and
grossly positive resection margins are strongly associated with increased mortality rates. Tumor
grade is the most significant predictor of outcome. Complete surgical resection is the most
effective treatment for primary or recurrent retroperitoneal sarcomas (A, E). Surgical cure can be
limited because the margins are often compromised by anatomic constraints. There is no
difference in survival between those who had a resection with a grossly positive margin and those
with inoperable tumors. Unlike extremity sarcomas, external beam radiation therapy is limited for
retroperitoneal malignancies because there is a low tolerance for radiation to surrounding
structures. Postoperative and intraoperative radiation therapy have been shown to reduce local
recurrence, but further studies are needed to determine if this leads to improved survival.
    Reference: Lewis, J. J., Leung, D., Woodruff, J. M., et al. (1998). Retroperitoneal soft-tissue sarcoma:
analysis of 500 patients treated and followed at a single institution. Annals of Surgery, 228(3), 355–
365.
15. B. This patient was recently diagnosed with atrial fibrillation and started on oral anticoagulants.
One should suspect a rectus sheath hematoma in older patients taking anticoagulants who present
with the clinical triad of acute abdominal pain, an abdominal wall mass, and anemia. The mass is
palpable even during flexion of abdominal wall muscles helping differentiate this from an
intraperitoneal process (Fothergill sign) (D). In a review of 126 patients by Mayo Clinic,
anticoagulation was associated with 70%. Above the arcuate line, the etiology is often related to a
lesion to the superior epigastric artery within the rectus sheath (E). In most cases, there is no clear
history of trauma (C). In particular, in the elderly who are taking oral anticoagulants, they typically
occur spontaneously. The most common treatment for patients with rectus sheath hematomas is
rest, analgesics, and blood transfusions as necessary. In general, coagulopathies are corrected;
however, continuing anticoagulation may be prudent in select patients (e.g., biomechanical valve,
recent saddle embolus) (A). In extreme cases, angioembolization may be required.
    References: Alla, V. M., Karnam, S. M., Jaushik, M., et al. (2010). Spontaneous rectus sheath
hematoma. Western Journal of Emergency Medicine, 11(1), 76–79.
    Cherry, W. B., & Mueller, P. S. (2006). Rectus sheath hematoma: review of 126 cases at a single
institution. Medicine (Baltimore), 85(2), 105–110.
22